My favorite insights



In this essay I want to highlight my favorite insights as stand-alone stories (they can be read in any order). They are my favorite insights, as these are controversial and/or new.

	(The unexpected order in DNA)

	(The impact of horizontal gene transfer)

	The evolution of evolvability

	Evidence for group selection

	Evidence for Lamarckian genetics

	Prokaryotes having an immune system

	The term ‘virus empire’




The unexpected order in DNA

A null-hypothesis assumes DNA has no order in it: each nucleotide is expected to be present at equal ratio’s and genes are inserted randomly within the DNA.

One might expect a genome to be messy, from the assumption that DNA is inserted into a genome at a random position. 

Chance and selection in organizing the genome


Evidence for group selection


In prokaryotes, genes can be acquired vertically (from the ancestor) and horizontally. In the latter, called horizontal gene transfer (HGT), a cell can obtain DNA (1) in free-floating form from the environment (transformation), (2) from another cell by direct contact (conjugation), (3) from infection by bacteriophages (transduction), and (4) from gene transfer agents (GTAs) [4]. GTAs are, in contrast to transduction, friendly constructs that do not cause the cell to lyse, and appear to only serve the purpose of HGT. In other words: GTAs serve the sharing of DNA, with no evidence that the donor receives any direct benefit from this. For a laysman this feels intuitive: the donor serves the interest of its species as a whole! This concept, called group selection, is, however, very controversial in current biology [6], where the individual is claimed to be the unit of selection. But, in my humble opinion, group selection is not the only explanation possible: the first alternative explanation is that GTAs might yield a higher indirect fitness, as prokaryotes are often close to their relatives. This is supported by evidence that HGT (in general) is more common amongst closely related species [7]. The second alternative explanation for the seemingly altruistic nature of GTAs could be found by following the line of thought of the Selfish Gene, where a GTA is simply an additional way for a gene to spread. I find it interesting to find out unambiguously in which of the three (if not more) explanations GTAs fall into. 


Evidence for Lamarckian genetics

Tout ce que la nature a fait acquérir ou perdre aux individus par l' influence des circonstances [...], elle le conserve par la génération aux nouveaux individus. Lamarcke [9] (English translation: all the acquisitions or losses wrought by nature on individuals, through the influence of the environment [...]; all these are preserved by reproduction to the new individuals which arise)

Lamarckianism (the Second Law of  Lamarcke is quoted above) has had its share of critics. The well-known example of the giraffe’s long neck, that the giraffe would have aqcuired by stretching it, passing the stretched neck to the next generation. Nowadays, this example is more often explained by natural and/or sexual selection. But there do have risen examples that are inherited as Lamarck imagined. One such example is the field of epigenetics, where the methylation of DNA appears to be commonly known. 


The term ‘virus empire’

Bacteria 



Genome evolution

   Bacteria

       Computer

           DNA = program

           non-DNA = OS

       Holy grail of microbial ecology

           Who are there?

           What do they do?

           With whom do they do it?

       Species

           Bacterial species definition

           Fitness

               High metabolic flux

               Be flexible

               Be hardy

               Lifestyle

                   Planktonic

                   Within host

                   Gradient

   Horizontal gene transfer

   Lateral gene transfer

   Genomics

   Genome

       Architecture

           One origin

               Higher G+C content

               Lower evolutionary rate

           One terminus

           Vital genes prefer leading strand

           Preference for A+T

           Size

               Small

                   Most viral insertions will be lethal

                   Loss of genes by dependence on host

               Big

                   Viral insertions have higher chance of success

                   Eukaryotes

                   Prokaryotes in unstable invironments

                   Prokaryotes with biphasic lifestyle

           Constraints

               Supercoiling

               Domain structure

               Attachment to specific sites

               Fuzzy motifs

       Core genome

       Pan genome

           Open

           Closed

       Genes

           Gain

               Duplicatation

           Loss

               Pseudogene

               Gene excision

       Phylogeny

       Reflects history

           16S rRNA

           18S rRNA

   Experimental





[9] Jean-Baptiste Lamarck Zoological Philosophy trans. Hugh Elliot, 1914, p.113